about killer asteroids and comets? I would beware
of spending an awful lot of money on killer
asteroid and comet detection. I don't think
that's appropriate. I think we as a scientific
community should avoid raising the scare. This
will always happen, however. I mean, look at the
1910 comet. situation, and you've got an
analogous situation. These things develop of
their own accord, and in these tight funding
times, it's awfully hard to fault the people who
stand ready to prey on the public's fears. But I
think as responsible scientists, we can do
something. I would hope that we could keep the
expenditures on these things to within
reasonable and appropriate limits.
The relationship of the press, or TV, whatever,
media, with the AS is certainly a lot different
than it was when I was a grad student. I mean, a
reporter at an AS meeting was a real rarity. Maybe
from the local paper, astronomers meet or
something, and now there's quite a bit done. It's
really quite a professional operation. Do you
think that this has really helped get astronomers
more publicity and reach more public? Oh, yes. Oh,
yes. It certainly has. I mean, you cannot
underestimate the effect that Kathy Sawyer's
articles on the front page of the Washington Post
or the New York Times coverage on its science
section and i guess we had a we were on the front page
of the times at our last meeting as well and that's
got to be very very helpful and and i think it's
helpful in two ways it's helpful because it alerts
the congress and the public of the fact that
exciting things are going on in science and it's
it's something worth doing but i think it's also
important for its effect on the field for pointing
out to the practitioners that it's okay to put your
name in the papers, and you should be doing more of
it, more to communicate, let's say, with the
public than we currently are doing. We cannot
disconnect ourselves from the people who are
funding us, and as a science, we've been tending to
do that. We used to have a little saying, Iceman and
I, and various other people, the planetary game,
the Mount Wilson Palomar, funded by Carnegie,
Their attitude was the public be damned. Yeah. You
know, and obviously we can't do that anymore.
Well, they're now taking public money. So they
have to do this, too. Oh. Okay, we're back here with
Peter Boyce, and talking about some of the
overlaps with some of the old-timers at Lowell.
Now, there were two Slifers, correct? Yeah. V.M.
Slifer had already retired from Lowell and was
living downtown, but E.C. V.M., of course, was the
person who discovered the galactic recession
radial velocities. Which is often mistakenly
attributed to somebody at Mount Wilson. Yes.
Hubble did organize them, but they were first
discovered by V.M. Slipher, and he would spend
three nights on the same exposure at the
telescope. So... He really had to work to get him.
But E.C. was a wonderful character. Tremendous
memory. When I first met him in 63, 64, 65, he would
come in and he had all the plates, as I said,
organized in cigar boxes. And if you asked him
for... what Mars looked like in a 1927 opposition.
He said, oh, yeah, that one we had to go to South
Africa for. And we stored that in a corona box. And
he'd go and he'd pick out the box and open it up. Sure
enough, it would be the 1927 plates from South
Africa. And he could pull them out and put them on
the viewer and talk about all the things that
happened during that year and the growth of the
dark areas and the caps and the way it would uh cloud
over and so on so uh it was quite different from any
kind of modern library and plate ball and stuff
when we tried to use these plates and put
densitometers well some of them had densitometer
spots and we tried to use those for a study of blue
clearing which is times when you could see surface
features in the blue as well as in the red, and found
that these densitometer spots were really badly
done, so that the whole thing was really not a very
firm footing from the standpoint of calibrated
photometric scale that you'd like to have it. But
certainly, EC had a tremendous... library, and
most of it just all stored in his memory. And he
would go up with a 24-inch, he'd take a plate, he'd
start the exposure, and it would begin to drift out
a little bit, and instead of turning the knobs, the
slow-motion knobs, to bring the telescope back
on, he would just kind of lean against it, you know,
and one would think that he had probably better
ability to get that telescope where he wanted and
keep it pointed than most modern observers have
today.
Bill Sinton was another interesting character
and loved gadgets and loved practical jokes too.
Although maybe Larry Frederick was one of the
great practical jokes of all time. I guess Larry
was the practical joke. Anyway, what happened
was, I forget the names, but there are two
telescopes on Mars Hill, the 24-inch and the
21-inch. And I think Larry came out. No, Larry did
it. Larry was observing on the 24-inch. Which is a
refractor or a reflector? This is the reflector.
not the old telescope.
About 2 or 3 in the morning the Milky Way would rise
in the east and we had some poor guy come in from the
east coast or maybe even from Europe observing on
the 21 inch and this milky way would begin to rise in
the east and larry would kind of wander down the
road and poke his head in the 21 inch telescope
which is a building which had a roll-off roof and
say well you see over there i'm beginning to get a
little uh problem with my photometry and and i
think i see a cloud bank coming in from the east and
the guy would look over and he said oh yeah he said
wow that's that's pretty bright i i guess i'll uh
just Larry said, I think I'm going to close up and go
home. And the guy said, I'll do that too. And he
closed up the 21-inch and went home. Of course,
Larry went back and spent the rest of the night
taking data. And he did it for three nights in a row
until the guy discovered that maybe this is
something else. And he waited a little longer, and
suddenly it was very clear that this was the Milky
Way that was sending him home to bed. And Bill
Sinton used to tell that story with the greatest
gusto you can imagine. Or the other one is to...
position people in the dome so when they look out
the slit they're looking at sculptor in the south
galactic pole and jesus on a high cloud that's
right that's another good one um any more
alzheimer's lamp one i didn't overlap with but he
of course was at lowell observatory for a long time
and he was one of the early people to try to bring uh
quantitative measurements to uh to planetary
astronomy. And he never got credit, really, for
what he did, because I don't think he published
enough. He wasn't aggressive enough. And I think
there was probably a major feeling among the West
Coast astronomers that these upstarts at Lowell
were not as good scientists as other people.
Lampman really did a lot of pioneering work in
radiometry, did he not? Tremendous amount. But he
was a nut on instrumentation. When he died, I think
every battery that had ever been bought by Lowell
Observatory was there with its... I mean, every
month he would go around all the batteries and the
recorders and so forth and measure the voltage and
keep a record of it in a notebook. And so it would
start at a volt and a half, say, and then work down
and work down. Finally... the 1.2 volts that
became useless, not enough juice in it. Well, he
put it on a shelf, but he would still measure it
every month. Bill Sinton said he saw notebooks of
Lamplins that had battery measurements where the
voltages were half a volt and a tenth of a volt. You
know, I think eventually the whole thing must
have, the acid must have eaten through and it
became worthless. But apparently there were just
rows upon rows of dead batteries. dead light bulbs
were saved also after the filament burned out in
the hopes that maybe they could be resurrected.
It's a wild thing. My hope at that time was, except
it would have given Henry a heart attack, was to...
Henry who? Henry Giklis, was to sneak down into the
vault where the original Pluto discovery plates
were kept and replace them with plain glass and
stow them somewhere else. So when Henry would
bring a visitor down to show them very carefully
the original discovery plates of Pluto, he would
find plain glass. But I am absolutely convinced if
I'd done that and been found out, it would have been
worth my job at Lowell. When you first got there,
Could you live on the salary? I mean, Flagstaff's a
pretty expensive place, being 166. And did they
pay you enough so you could actually make a living?
I thought so at the time. They provided me with a
house and a major salary of $6,500. Did
you pay your own utilities, or did they provide
those? They provided the utilities. It was all
right. You know, none of us got rich. Some of us got
rich. The Slifers got rich on the real estate they
had in the town. And Henry got rich on the cotton.
Cotton? He had a cotton farm down outside of
Phoenix.
But those of us who stuck to the business didn't
seem to amass a lot of money. Amass a lot of money.
Any more old-timer stories? Hey, what about... I
can tell you a couple on John Hall. All right. If you
want that. Sure. John was the most avid observer
that I had almost ever seen. And it was so important
to him to be using the telescope and getting data
that he would do that in preference to making sure
that his equipment was working right. And he had to
throw away a whole month's worth of dark-run data
when he discovered that he hadn't calibrated his
instruments. I thought it was just an example of
priorities gone wrong. But I found him one time
chasing an object down as it sank in the west. And
the 72-inch telescope, at that time we'd put a
72-inch mirror in it, had... You had to put it
across the pier, and it was an English mount. And so
when it was setting in the west, it had to be up above
the axis. And so to get to the back end, the business
end, you had to really get up high. I found him on a
rickety metal roll-around observing ladder,
which was not tall enough. He was standing on a gray
box. We had several gray boxes around us to various
heights to reach the eyepiece. This gray box was
perched on the waist-high observing ladder
railing so that the railing itself was 10 feet over
the floor. He had this foot and a half high box, and
he was standing on tiptoes as this object he was
looking was setting down into the pine trees on the
west. Well, of course, he was doing one of these
Rube Goldberg things one time and fell off it and
broke his ribs rather badly. I guess one of many
astronomers who've had accidents like that. This
was before your time, of course, but were there any
rumors circulating around the staff at the time
about Percival Lowell and his longtime
secretary? Was her name Rixey, somebody or
something? I lived in the old library, and I spent a
good long time looking for where the supposed
tunnel from the library to Lowell's house, which
was basically our front yard, had been. I did not
see any evidence of the tunnel. I'm not sure that,
given the lack of traffic on the hill, that they
would have needed a tunnel. Yes, there were plenty
of rumors. It is interesting that Lowell got
married very late in life, and a couple of days
after that happened, his longtime secretary just
departed and never returned. So that was around,
huh? Yes. Oh, yeah. Actually, some guys from
Lowell, I think Len, whatchamacallit, and
somebody else gave a paper on that at the
historical section of the Division for Planetary
Astronomy one time. They couldn't find the tunnel
either. They went out and probed for it. This was in
the 70s. And couldn't find it. Well, it's very
interesting because... People at Lowell did a lot
of things, actually, to try to verify the reality
of the canals, including putting one of those
little Martian globes that are all around the
observatory way up on the hills in the San
Francisco peaks and looking at them with the
24-inch to see what they would see. We actually did
suffer a bit from Lowell's you know, canal scheme.
I think that EC, while not believing in the canals,
believed in the network of straight lines very,
very, very, very much. When you were there, how did
the townsfolk take to the observatory and the
astronomers? Well, they really liked it. We had a
couple times had an open house that drew a lot of
people out to the Anderson Mesa. And that was
really exciting because people would look in,
they'd see a globular cluster through the
telescope, and they'd just go haywire. And you
realized all over again what got you into
astronomy in the first place. You start telling
them how the light's been coming since before the
pyramids were built and so on. The mystery and
wonder of it, the public brings that back. And
that's a great thing. I was just always well
received in the town. I actually did a little
weekly show for a little while. Went down to the
coffee shop, and they had a little coffee shop talk
show. And I'd talk a little bit about what was going
on at the observatory, and Henry Giklis
absolutely went ballistic when he found out. I did
it for three or four weeks, and mentioned
something about... what Henry was doing. And
people around the town didn't know what Henry was
doing, even though it was very, very important,
just the proper motion survey. And Henry just put
down the law, laid down the law that he was the one
that was supposed to be the communication with the
town. And other astronomers were not supposed to
talk about what was going on at Lowell. And it's
just such a defeating, self-defeating Well,
that's the way astronomers used to behave. Yeah. I
think in general was quite true. And I think, you
know, that's the kind of thing we talked about
earlier. I think we suffer from it. I know when I was
a grad student, in fact, even today, people say,
you know, what are you doing? I say, I'm an
astronomer. And they say, but you don't act like an
astronomer. Oh, I know, I know. I mean, and I think
it's an image left over from, now certainly if you
go way back, you know, George Aylor and Hale types,
they weren't shrinking violets. But did you find
when you were in graduate school that the older
astronomers tended to be very much to themselves
and not too interested in the public? That's
right. I was both at Harvard and at Michigan. That
was left to one or two people around the
observatory. And it was definitely not a high
priority item. No, no. But then again, they
weren't so dependent on public money at the time.
And they just didn't realize the importance of
keeping the public informed and excited about
science. But anyway, the times at Lowell were very
interesting. It must have been wonderful with
Harold Johnson there. because he had a real
screaming fight with a number of people,
including somebody was, one director came in, the
one before John Hall who lasted just a year. Who was
the director before? I can't remember. Bart Boak?
No, that was after. After. He lasted only a year,
and he went and he cleaned out everything in the
attic, and he threw it out the window into a heap on
the ground. And Harold Johnson and the two
Slifers, and maybe Lamplin was still alive at the
time, they were, as fast as the stuff was being
thrown onto the pile, they were grabbing it up and
taking it back inside the building. Waste not,
want not. As a consequence, you know, when I moved
in, I moved into Harold Johnson's old office, and
there were a lot of stuff still left. But there's a
tremendous amount of historical material and
interesting instruments and things which were no
longer used. Some of the bailing wax and bailing
wire and sealing wax contraptions that were
heaved out in this fit of clearing out that I think
would have been nice to have around. It made a fine
museum for, you know, archaic astronomical
instruments. I mean, you know, I'm just thinking
These young whippersnappers, they don't know
what a vacuum tube is. They don't even know what a
1P21 is. And we had a whole, John Hall had a whole
closet full of them. Okay.
One more point here. I was talking with Peter Boyce
about the state of planetary astronomy in the 20s
and 30s when not only was it held in low repute by a
other astronomers, but also results were few and
far between, and probably a lot of that was due to
the fact that there was an instrumentation
barrier, both as to wavelength and stability for
photometry and wavelength for detectors for
spectroscopy, and so you were just about to say
something about that. I was saying it's
absolutely true that the kind of instrumentation
that you use for stellar photometry, by and large,
is not very useful for planetary astronomy.
Telescopes, for instance, if you're trying to
track a fast-moving asteroid, are hard to point
when you're doing photometry on. So people didn't
do photometry on asteroids. The visible light
photometry doesn't tell you a great deal about the
asteroids. You have to get into the infrared to
really pick out the different asteroid families.
And the infrared detectors weren't there. And
they were not very much encouraged. Their use was
not very encouraged in astrophysics, at least in
my experience. It was quite unusual. to have
somebody like Bill Sinton actually working at two
microns. And early on, I know when I went to
graduate school at Michigan, we were
concentrated so heavily on the visible and near
ultraviolet and near infrared, because that's
where all the spectrum lines of interest were in
the stellar atmospheres at that temperature
range that We just didn't really pay much
attention to the infrared at all, and yet that's
exactly the kind of area you need to be in when
you're doing planetary astronomy. High Spinrat
and I used to and still do refer to H-alpha, which of
course is in the red region of the spectrum, as the
Mount Wilson infrared. Oh, yeah. No, that's it. I
mean, High's work on water vapor in... the late
type stars was almost pioneering work in those
days. Very, very important kind of thing to be
done. And it just, a lot of people didn't do that. I
mean, they were just happy with the information
they were getting, the physics that they knew in
the visible. And I think that probably had... That
was why planetary astronomers couldn't do
anything except take pictures and look at them.
There just wasn't the ability to measure small
parts of the planetary disk photoelectrically.
Well, I remember going at McDonald when the Anobi
came out while I was on an observing run, and so the
spectrograph was all set up to work in the
relatively near infrared. So we got some
spectrum, we looked up tables, lists of lines in
Novi, and they occasionally would get out to
H-alpha, but usually they'd stop before even
that. I mean, just start out from 30-some hundred
angstroms, they'd go out to 5,500 or 6,000 or
something, and then just plain stop. You know, in
our day when we went to graduate school, the
panchromatic plates that went out to the red were
even relatively new and often not the plate of
choice if you could get away with stopping at 5,000
angstroms. And I think that colored our approach
to everything for so long that it was almost a
disaster.
Okay, Peter Boyce has one great story. Well, Maybe
more. What I meant was one hell of a story. Back in
the late 60s, there was this phenomenon of
brightening of the Jovian satellites upon
reappearance from eclipse. And sometimes it
would happen and sometimes it wouldn't. And
people, because of the nearby presence of
Jupiter, and it was a very difficult observation
to make, We did some observations with an area
scanner, which in fact showed that the satellite
was in fact a lot brighter immediately after it
came out of eclipse. But again, it didn't always
happen. So anyway, the story is that we were going
to look at a reappearance with Kent Ford's
infrared image tube, and that went up to one
micron, basically, on a spectrograph. You
mentioned the name of the satellite. EO, I
believe. And so we got all together, and Kent Ford
and I got the spectrograph loaded in the back end of
the truck, and we were on our way out to Anderson
Mesa because where the telescope was located,
and... had to get up the hill, get the telescope on,
and get ready for this reappearance, which was
scheduled for about 10 o'clock in the evening,
because we were going to try to get a spectrum
immediately after it came out from the shadow of
Jupiter. Well, at that point, we had the
observatory talk the county into repaving the
road to go up to Anderson Mesa. Part of the sealing
wax and bailing wire approach, you get other
people to do as much of the work as you can. And so
they agreed to take on the maintenance of the road,
but only if we widened it, or it was widened. So they
were in the process of widening this road, and
there was a big, fat, dough-belly-type
construction foreman for the county highway
department And they had just blown 300 yards of the
old road away. We arrived at the bottom of the hill
and wanted to get up to the top of the mesa and there
was no other way to get up to the top of the mesa. And
so we were raging up and down trying to explain to
this guy who couldn't give a hoot, you know, about
why it was so important to get up there. He said,
can't you take your observations tomorrow night?
We'll have it all bulldozed out and the road
pioneered back for you by then. No. He said,
tonight we have an eclipse and we tried to explain
that it's The moon is coming out from behind
Jupiter, and we have to catch it right as it comes
out. And this only happens once a month or
something like that. And the guy thought some
more. We've got a hell of a lot of rock there. He
said, I don't know if we can pioneer a road through
or not. He says, you know, is that your instrument
on the back of the truck? Pointing to the
spectrograph, which was sitting there. He said,
yeah, that's it. He says, well, why the hell don't
you just fuck around with it down here? He says, why
do you have to go all the way to the top of the hill?
And he says, no, we've got to have the telescope. So
he got on. He put overtime on. And they pioneered a
road up to the top of the hill. We got the telescope
on and fired up and the image tube working and
everything going 15 minutes before the
appearance. It was absolutely spectacular. And
of course, the appearance, the spectra did not
show any different changes in it. How did that
eventually turn out? Was that just an
instrumental artifact? No, it turns out to have
been the volcanism. Frost, when you lose a little
bit of the heat of the sun, things frosted over and
the albedo did in fact change. But if you didn't
have fresh volcanic ejecta, then this wouldn't
happen. So that's the intermittent character. It
was the new sulfur that did it. And of course, we
couldn't find that in one micron specter. to have
this old guy with his belly hanging over his belt.
Couldn't you just fuck around with it down here?